documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/intro.adoc, before:

= What is Quarkus?
:experimental:

image::logo.png[quarkus-logo, 900]

Quarkus is a Kubernetes Native Java stack tailored for GraalVM & OpenJDK HotSpot, crafted from the best of breed Java libraries and standards. Amazingly fast boot time, incredibly low RSS memory (not just heap size!) offering near instant scale up and high density memory utilization in container orchestration platforms like Kubernetes. 

Quarkus uses a technique called https://quarkus.io/vision/container-first[compile time boot^] and offers a unified imperative and reactive programming model and a number of other developer features like Live Reload to bring _real joy_ to your development.

*Red Hat* offers the fully supported https://access.redhat.com/products/quarkus[Red Hat Build of Quarkus(RHBQ)^] with support and maintenance of Quarkus. In this workhop, you will use Quarkus to develop Kubernetes-native microservices and deploy them to OpenShift. Quarkus is one of the runtimes included in https://www.redhat.com/en/products/runtimes[Red Hat Runtimes^]. https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_build_of_quarkus[Learn more about RHBQ^].

Throughout this lab you'll discover how Quarkus can make your development of cloud native apps faster and more productive.

== First Step: Connect to your Developer Sandbox environment!

To run this workshop you need to provision your own Developer Sandbox environment. This you do from https://developers.redhat.com/developer-sandbox

The Developer Sandbox provides you with 30 days of no-cost access to a shared cluster on OpenShift. Get access to your own preconfigured OpenShift environment for development and testing, hosted and managed by Red Hat.

Click the *Start your sandbox for free* 

image::devSandboxrequest.png[Request environment, 800]

If you don't have a Red Hat account previously you can create one by clicking the *Register for a Red Hat account* link below the login details. It's free of charge and you get access to lots of resources at developers.redhat.com for example.

image::createAccount.png[login,800]

Fill in the details required and you are good to go. If needed go back to the Start your Sandbox for free and click the button. 

In the console opening(Hybrid Cloud Console) click *Launch* (showed below) for Red Hat OpenShift to access your Red Hat OpenShift environment. 

image::launchSandbox.png[login,800]

This will lead you to the OpenShift console. 

Select *Log in with DevSandbox* if the choice opens up.

image::loginDevSandbox.png[login,800]

Take note of the cluster details in the url of the browser. It will be something like the below.

[source, none]
----
https://console-openshift-console.apps.sandbox-m2.ll9k.p1.openshiftapps.com/add/ns/johndoe-dev
----

Remember the *yourusername-dev* part, you will use this username multiple times during this workshop. To start with you first have to personalize this workshop guide. You do this by adding your username in the box in the top menu(if it's not already done) - do it without the "-dev" part.

*In the  box, enter your username* where indicated below.

image::setuser.png[Set User ID above, 700]

When you have added your username it will look like this:

image::alreadyset.png[Set User ID above, 700]

If your sandbox environment is properly set, then you can move on. 
This will customize the links and copy/paste code for this workshop.

[NOTE]
====
If you accidently type the wrong username, just click the green recycle icon to reset it and add the correct username.
====

== Click-to-Copy

You will see various code and command blocks throughout these exercises which can be copy/pasted directly by clicking anywhere on the block of text:

[source,java,role="copypaste"]
----
/* A sample Java snippet that you can copy/paste by clicking */
public class CopyMeDirectly {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("You can copy this whole class with a click!");
    }
}
----

Simply click once and the whole block is copied to your clipboard, ready to be pasted with kbd:[CTRL+V] (or kbd:[Command+V] on Mac OS).

There are also Linux shell commands that can also be copied and pasted into a Terminal in your Development Environment:

[source,sh,role="copypaste"]
----
echo "This is a bash shell command that you can copy/paste by clicking"
----

## Access Your Development Environment

You will be using Visual Studio Code (VS Code) based on https://developers.redhat.com/products/openshift-dev-spaces/overview[Red Hat OpenShift Dev Spaces^]. **Changes to files are auto-saved every few seconds**, so you don't need to explicitly save changes.

To get started, access the Dev Spaces instance through the application picker in the top menu of the OpenShift console.

image::openDevSpaces.png[Open DevSpaces via app picker, 700]

Or click *Launch* on the Red Hat Dev Spaces card where you accessed the OpenShift console. 

Select *Log in with OpenShift* button if needed:

image::login_with_openshift.png[login,800]


Select *Log in with DevSandbox*

image::loginDevSandbox.png[login,800]

[NOTE]
====
In case you see the *Authorize Access* page as below, select *Allow selected permissions* button.

image::auth-access.png[auth-access, 800]
====

Once you log in, you’ll be placed on the *Create Workspace* dashboard. Copy the following `Git Repo URL` and select `Create & Open`. Make sure the rh-sandbox branch is used

* *Git Repo URL*: `https://github.com/bmeklund/quarkus-workshop-m1m2-labs/tree/rh-sandbox`

image::ds-landing.png[ds, 800]

A new window or tab in your web browser will open automatically to showcase the progess about *Starting workspace quarkus-workshop*. It takes about *60* seconds to finish the process.

image::starting-workspace.png[ds, 800]

[NOTE]
====
In case you see this information page, select `Start your workspace` to continue  using your workspace.

image::starting-workspace-info.png[ds, 800]
====

After a few seconds, you’ll be placed in the workspace.

image::ds-workspace.png[ds, 800]

[NOTE]
====
In case you see this information page, click on `Yes, I trust the authors`.

image::ds-trust-popup.png[ds, 800]
====

You'll use all of these during the course of this workshop, so keep this browser tab open throughout. **If things get weird, you can simply reload the browser tab to refresh the view.**

The state of your changes will be saved in a persistent volume on your Sandbox environment so if you need to shut down for a while you can continue later on.(As long as your sandbox environment is not decomissioned that is).

Ready? Let's go!

Commit message:

Adding guide around restarting workspaces

documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/intro.adoc, after:

= What is Quarkus?
:experimental:

image::logo.png[quarkus-logo, 900]

Quarkus is a Kubernetes Native Java stack tailored for GraalVM & OpenJDK HotSpot, crafted from the best of breed Java libraries and standards. Amazingly fast boot time, incredibly low RSS memory (not just heap size!) offering near instant scale up and high density memory utilization in container orchestration platforms like Kubernetes. 

Quarkus uses a technique called https://quarkus.io/vision/container-first[compile time boot^] and offers a unified imperative and reactive programming model and a number of other developer features like Live Reload to bring _real joy_ to your development.

*Red Hat* offers the fully supported https://access.redhat.com/products/quarkus[Red Hat Build of Quarkus(RHBQ)^] with support and maintenance of Quarkus. In this workhop, you will use Quarkus to develop Kubernetes-native microservices and deploy them to OpenShift. Quarkus is one of the runtimes included in https://www.redhat.com/en/products/runtimes[Red Hat Runtimes^]. https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_build_of_quarkus[Learn more about RHBQ^].

Throughout this lab you'll discover how Quarkus can make your development of cloud native apps faster and more productive.

== First Step: Connect to your Developer Sandbox environment!

To run this workshop you need to provision your own Developer Sandbox environment. This you do from https://developers.redhat.com/developer-sandbox

The Developer Sandbox provides you with 30 days of no-cost access to a shared cluster on OpenShift. Get access to your own preconfigured OpenShift environment for development and testing, hosted and managed by Red Hat.

Click the *Start your sandbox for free* 

image::devSandboxrequest.png[Request environment, 800]

If you don't have a Red Hat account previously you can create one by clicking the *Register for a Red Hat account* link below the login details. It's free of charge and you get access to lots of resources at developers.redhat.com for example.

image::createAccount.png[login,800]

Fill in the details required and you are good to go. If needed go back to the Start your Sandbox for free and click the button. 

In the console opening(Hybrid Cloud Console) click *Launch* (showed below) for Red Hat OpenShift to access your Red Hat OpenShift environment. 

image::launchSandbox.png[login,800]

This will lead you to the OpenShift console. 

Select *Log in with DevSandbox* if the choice opens up.

image::loginDevSandbox.png[login,800]

Take note of the cluster details in the url of the browser. It will be something like the below.

[source, none]
----
https://console-openshift-console.apps.sandbox-m2.ll9k.p1.openshiftapps.com/add/ns/johndoe-dev
----

Remember the *yourusername-dev* part, you will use this username multiple times during this workshop. To start with you first have to personalize this workshop guide. You do this by adding your username in the box in the top menu(if it's not already done) - do it without the "-dev" part.

*In the  box, enter your username* where indicated below.

image::setuser.png[Set User ID above, 700]

When you have added your username it will look like this:

image::alreadyset.png[Set User ID above, 700]

If your sandbox environment is properly set, then you can move on. 
This will customize the links and copy/paste code for this workshop.

[NOTE]
====
If you accidently type the wrong username, just click the green recycle icon to reset it and add the correct username.
====

== Click-to-Copy

You will see various code and command blocks throughout these exercises which can be copy/pasted directly by clicking anywhere on the block of text:

[source,java,role="copypaste"]
----
/* A sample Java snippet that you can copy/paste by clicking */
public class CopyMeDirectly {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("You can copy this whole class with a click!");
    }
}
----

Simply click once and the whole block is copied to your clipboard, ready to be pasted with kbd:[CTRL+V] (or kbd:[Command+V] on Mac OS).

There are also Linux shell commands that can also be copied and pasted into a Terminal in your Development Environment:

[source,sh,role="copypaste"]
----
echo "This is a bash shell command that you can copy/paste by clicking"
----

## Access Your Development Environment

You will be using Visual Studio Code (VS Code) based on https://developers.redhat.com/products/openshift-dev-spaces/overview[Red Hat OpenShift Dev Spaces^]. **Changes to files are auto-saved every few seconds**, so you don't need to explicitly save changes.

To get started, access the Dev Spaces instance through the application picker in the top menu of the OpenShift console.

image::openDevSpaces.png[Open DevSpaces via app picker, 700]

Or click *Launch* on the Red Hat Dev Spaces card where you accessed the OpenShift console. 

Select *Log in with OpenShift* button if needed:

image::login_with_openshift.png[login,800]


Select *Log in with DevSandbox*

image::loginDevSandbox.png[login,800]

[NOTE]
====
In case you see the *Authorize Access* page as below, select *Allow selected permissions* button.

image::auth-access.png[auth-access, 800]
====

Once you log in, you’ll be placed on the *Create Workspace* dashboard. Copy the following `Git Repo URL` and select `Create & Open`. Make sure the rh-sandbox branch is used

* *Git Repo URL*: `https://github.com/bmeklund/quarkus-workshop-m1m2-labs/tree/rh-sandbox`

image::ds-landing.png[ds, 800]

A new window or tab in your web browser will open automatically to showcase the progess about *Starting workspace quarkus-workshop*. It takes about *60* seconds to finish the process.

image::starting-workspace.png[ds, 800]

[NOTE]
====
In case you see this information page, select `Start your workspace` to continue  using your workspace.

image::starting-workspace-info.png[ds, 800]
====

After a few seconds, you’ll be placed in the workspace.

image::ds-workspace.png[ds, 800]

[NOTE]
====
In case you see this information page, click on `Yes, I trust the authors`.

image::ds-trust-popup.png[ds, 800]
====

You'll use all of these during the course of this workshop, so keep this browser tab open throughout. **If things get weird, you can simply reload the browser tab to refresh the view.**

[NOTE]
====
If your workspace have closed down due to inactivity you can restart it again from the Workspace overview, as detailed below. This also goes for if you end up with some strage behaviour in your workspace(if it gets unresponsive or you get strange errors in the IDE)

Just go to the DevSpaces overview, on the left hand side in the *recent workspaces* you will find the *quarkus-workshop* workspace. Hover over the name and click the 3 dots and choose Stop/Restart or Open to restart and access your workspace.

image::restart-workspace.png[restart, 800]
====

The state of your changes will be saved in a persistent volume on your Sandbox environment so if you need to shut down for a while you can continue later on.(As long as your sandbox environment is not decomissioned that is).

Ready? Let's go!
